Project Gutenberg's Crystal River Saga, by Theresa V. Hermon Francis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Crystal River Saga
       The Lore of the Colorado Rockies

Author: Theresa V. Hermon Francis

Contributor: William Lamartine Francis

Release Date: September 18, 2018 [EBook #57923]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRYSTAL RIVER SAGA ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






    [Illustration: PICTURE ON COVER—is part of one of the two remaining
    fire walls still left standing at the Old Marble Mill Site in
    Marble, Colo. Sheep Mountain can be seen through the door way and
    White House Mountain at right. Jeep tours can be taken to the tops
    of these peaks for very extensive sight-seeing trips.
                                             —_Photo by_ Will L. Francis]




                          _Crystal River Saga_
                      LORE OF THE COLORADO ROCKIES


                         by THERESA V. FRANCIS

                                                             Price $1.25




                           CRYSTAL RIVER SAGA


  _Come up a mile where the air is pure,
  Where the skies are clear and blue;
  Come up above the smoke and dust,
  Where good health waits for you._
                                                         —Author Unknown

    [Illustration: Western Slope of the Central COLORADO ROCKIES
 Showing in Particular the FISHING STREAMS and RECREATIONAL AREAS of Famous
                              GUNNISON COUNTY
                                           _Compiled by_ WILL L. FRANCIS]




                         INTRODUCING THE AUTHOR


Probably no town in the world has experienced more dramatic changes in a
lifetime, than has the quarry town of Marble, Colo. and one of the few
living persons who knows the story of each phase of Marble’s history is
Theresa Herman Francis. She and her husband, Bill, now spend only the
summers (winters in Tucson, Ariz.) in the white and green house in
Marble that was her year ’round home for 33 years.

One of the town’s active citizens during the 20’s and 30’s when the
population of Marble numbered in the thousands, Theresa changed her life
very little when Marble became a ghost town in 1945. Although living
alone in town most of the time, she did not become a recluse, but
remained the same cheerful, energetic, neighborly person she had always
been. By hard work and ingenious use of materials familiar to her
through the years of teaching arts and crafts in the Marble and other
schools, she established an independent living for herself. By patiently
and accurately answering dozens of questions thousands of times, and by
friendly help to all of the people who stopped at her roadside stand
every summer, Theresa has made many friends for herself and for Marble.
By her enthusiasm for, and faith in the future of Marble, she has done
more than any other person toward bringing her beloved town back to
life.

Half in fun, half in tribute, Loey Rinquist of Aspen, Colo. once began a
Christmas card to her, “Dear Mrs. Marble.” It is “Mrs. Marble” herself
who has written the story of Marble for you. Her long teaching
experience, and her years of answering questions for tourists, have
prepared her to answer all of your questions, herein exactly as they
have occurred.

This booklet will serve as guide, and be an interesting and accurate
record of your trip through beautiful and historic Crystal River Valley.

                                                       Marian M. Paschal
                                          Marble and Fort Collins, Colo.
                                          La Paz, Bolivia, South America

    [Illustration: CHAIR MOUNTAIN, CRYSTAL RIVER AND HIGHWAY—just above
    Hays Creek Falls, nine miles below Marble. Lower road was the
    Crystal River & San Juan railroad bed, converted to a road in 1945.
    The upper road (Bunker Hill road) was used for general
    transportation prior to this time. Beautiful Chair Mountain, covered
    with snow, can be seen in the background.
                —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte, Glenwood Spgs., Colo.]




                          _Crystal River Saga
                                  Lore
                                 of the
                                Colorado
                                Rockies_


                                _Author_
                           THERESA V. FRANCIS

                         _in association with_
                            Will L. Francis


                              MARBLE _via_
                          Carbondale, Colorado
                                U. S. A.

                            COPYRIGHT © 1959
                                  _by_
                Theresa V. Francis _and_ Will L. Francis

                              MARBLE _via_
                          CARBONDALE, COLORADO

                    1st Edition, 1959, 5,000 Copies
                    2nd Edition, 1962, 5,000 Copies
                    3rd Edition, 1966, 5,000 Copies

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form
without permission in writing from the publishers, except by a reviewer
who may quote brief passages in an article to be published in a magazine
or newspaper.

    [Illustration: HOME OF THE AUTHOR—She has lived in this house since
    coming to Marble in 1923.
                       —_Photo courtesy_ Glen L. Gebhardt, Denver, Colo.]

                Printed in the United States of America
                       POERTNER LITHOGRAPHING CO.
                             DENVER, COLO.




                                PRELUDE


I came to Marble, Colo. in 1923 while it was still a very active
thriving little city. My first husband, Theodore (Ted) A. Herman, worked
in the marble mill almost twenty years: then after a few years sickness
he died, and I remained a widow over eleven years, never leaving Marble
except for brief visits with relatives. Many times during these winters
I was the only person in town, yet I was never bored or afraid. The
telephone company kept my phone in good working order and I received my
mail three times a week. I had a good radio, loved to read, write
letters, and do my pyro-plastic work to sell at the stand (Ken’s Pop
Stand) during the summers. This stand was started by my grandson,
Kenneth E. Herman, in 1948, as a nestegg for his college education. When
I quit teaching school in 1952, we ran it together until 1956 when he
graduated from South High School in Denver and felt he must find a more
lucrative job. I have run it alone since.

In late 1956 I married again and now spend my summers in Marble and
winters in Tucson, Ariz., where my husband is a Linotype operator on a
Tucson daily paper. It is our earnest desire to spend the rest of our
lives in Marble after he retires.

In attempting to compile a history of the Crystal River Valley I have
accumulated such a vast amount of interesting material that it would be
impossible to condense it into a booklet of 10,000 words. So I have
decided to write a brief history of the various locales and answer the
questions most often asked at the pop stand. Then after another year or
two of research I’ll try to write a book containing a more detailed
history and memoirs of the many interesting people who have lived in the
valley, if I feel the public would like such a volume.

If this little booklet has given you some pleasure and knowledge of this
marvelous valley, then it has accomplished its purpose and I am happy. I
am sure that once you have visited this portion of the western slope and
know its history you will love it as I do.

                                                      Theresa V. Francis

    [Illustration: THE DEVIL’S PUNCH BOWLS—half way between Schofield
    and Crystal City. The road is to the right, high above these falls.
                       —_Photo courtesy_ Colin L. Moore, Gunnison, Colo.]




                          _CRYSTAL RIVER SAGA_


One of the most beautiful rivers in Colorado has its source at Schofield
Pass high above Elko Basin and Schofield Park. It is fed by melting snow
and many crystal clear springs, hence the name Crystal River. And it
does not belie its name, as, excepting a few weeks in the spring when
melting snow along its lower tributaries gives it a roily turbulent
appearance, it is truly crystal clear.




                              _SCHOFIELD_
                   _The Flower Garden of the Rockies_


                (_Elevation Approximately 10,000 feet_)

Schofield has been called “The flower garden of the Rockies” and rightly
so. It is carpetted with multifarious species of flowers, ranging from
the delicate snow flowers and Alpine mosses through several shades of
Indian paint brushes, blue and purple lupines, and wild roses to the
lusty sunflowers. It is especially beautiful in July and August when
there are literally hundreds of acres of blue, purple, lavender, gold,
and brown columbines.

In the early 1870s gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, and galina were
found in this region, so naturally a mining camp mushroomed over night
into a village of 50 or 60 houses. These were the regular camp-style
buildings with no foundations, resembling huge packing boxes. There was
also a store, hotel, concentration mill, and several saloons. While its
population sometimes soared into the thousands, it was a transit, moving
people, living mostly in tents and always looking for better prospects.

Frank Hall’s “State of Colorado,” Vol. IV, page 150, date 1895, has this
to say about this mining camp:

  “Schofield was surveyed and platted August 24, 1879, by J. Evans for a
  company composed of Daniel Haines, S. H. Baker, B. F. Schofield (for
  whom it was named), H. G. Ferris, Wm. Agee, E. D. Baker, A. H.
  Slossen, and G. Edwards. It is located on Rock Creek (now called
  Crystal River) between Elko Basin and Crystal City, eight miles
  northwest of Gothic, and some 40 miles west of Gunnison. It never was
  a camp of much importance, though a central station for a number of
  prospectors.”

General Grant is supposed to have ridden into Schofield on a white mule
when he was campaigning for the U. S. presidency. Some of the
prospectors tried to sell him some mining claims; being unsuccessful in
that, they attempted to get him into a poker game and lose a claim to
him so they could boast, “The President of the United States owns mining
property in Schofield.” But they weren’t proficient enough in “stacking
the cards” to deal him a winning hand. Wishing to show him the grandeur
of the canyon they took him where he could look down into the Devil’s
Punch Bowls and told him it was called the “SOB Canyon.” He agreed it
was appropriately named but suggested a name that would be even harder
to beat, “The Schultz Canyon.” Schultz being his political opponent at
the time.

Schofield flourished for 12 or 14 years, then they decided the cost of
transportation was far more than the mineral mined warranted, so in 1886
practically the entire town was moved down the valley four miles and
Crystal City was started. Schofield became truly a “ghost town.”

It has always been easier to enter Schofield from Crested Butte than
from Crystal, but now with the opening of a jeep road between Schofield
and Crystal City all that has been changed and today a new Schofield is
in the making. This time it is to be a 40-acre tract of modern buildings
containing a 24-housing unit, a motel, and a store. None of the
over-night constructed mining shacks this time, but modern log cabins
built to withstand the elements at this nearly 10,000 foot elevation.

Leaving Schofield, the Crystal River goes through some of the most
spectacular scenery in the world. It runs down a ravine 50 feet below
the road, over boulders, through crevices, always in a hurry, it plunges
over a ledge into the Little Devils Punch Bowl, then it cascades over
another ledge making an impressive waterfall as it drops into the Big
Devils Punch Bowl many feet below, where it seethes and swirls trying to
find a way out to go on down the canyon.

The trail above the river was used as a wagon road from the early 1880s
to about 1917. John A. Williams drove a team of mules over it in 1911
hauling supplies for the Williams General Store in Crystal. Anton Danni
drove a supply wagon over it in 1916. The following item was taken from
the _Marble Booster_ newspaper, Aug. 12, 1916:

  “Tom Boughton, John J. Walsh, D. E. Dever, and Chas. Sisteg, elected
  at a caucus to represent Marble as delegates to the Democratic County
  Convention which convened at Gunnison Monday, left here early last
  Sunday morning, via Crystal (Schofield Pass) driving (horses) most of
  the distance and enjoying a motor ride the rest of the way.”

These are the last authentic accounts of this wagon road being used I
can find; so presume it was closed by rock slides shortly after this
date. Over 40 years passed before this scenic part of Colorado was again
made available to travel, mainly through the efforts of Gunnison County
Commissioner Anton Danni and his road overseer who made several trips
from Schofield to Crystal City, on foot, to see if it were possible, and
feasible, to open a jeep road. They decided it was and on Aug. 5, 1958,
after many months of hard work, the first jeeps came through from
Crested Butte to Marble. In 1959 they hope to improve the road enough to
permit passenger cars to come down; but no vehicle without a 4-wheel
drive could make the trip up the canyon.

The first group to make the trip over the new road was composed of the
following people:

  Mr. and Mrs. W. P. Cain         Almont, Colo.
  Mr. and Mrs. Bart Cox           Almont, Colo.
  Mr. and Mrs. John Ramsey        Almont, Colo.
  Mr. and Mrs. R. A. Gauby        Santa Monica, Calif.
  Mrs. Jane Schmidt               Almont, Colo.
  Mrs. C. Haase                   Almont, Colo.
  Mr. and Mrs. I. Fifer           Lake Forest, Ill.
  Mr. and Mrs. O. W. Shumate      Milwaukee, Wis.

Leaving the punch bowls the river runs another mile and a half before
the North Fork from Lead King Basin joins it. This tributary drains
another scenic valley. Snowmass Peak (14,077 ft. El.), Maroon Peak
(14,158 ft.) and Hagerman Peak can be seen in the background. Beautiful
trails wind through the various draws leading to Geneva Lake and the
Maroon Belles where fishing is at its best. This is also a highly
mineralized valley: silver, copper, lead, and zinc predominating. The
Copper King, 20th Century, Winchester, El Negroero and half of the
Richardson, all located in this basin, belong to Lee Sperry of the
Ragged Mountain district.

    [Illustration: CRYSTAL CITY MAIN STREET—Crystal Club, printing
    office, and hotel are some of the buildings still standing.
                —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte, Glenwood Spgs., Colo.]




                   _CRYSTAL, The Miners’ Ideal Camp_


                 (_Elevation Approximately 9,000 Feet_)

One half mile beyond the junction of the North Fork with the Crystal
River it reaches the little hamlet of Crystal City, magnificently
located in a small dale surrounded by several lofty peaks: Sheep
Mountain, Mineral Point, Crystal Peak, Bear Mountain (the one covered
with tall pines), White House, and Treasure Peaks. Crystal City was
another typical mining town of 70 houses, several general stores, a
school house (still standing), Crystal Club (still standing) and several
other saloons, a newspaper—_The Silver Lance_ followed by _The Crystal
River Current_ (still standing), a concentration mill and a smelter. The
peak of its population was about 650 inhabitants (some say 2,000). While
a railroad was never completed from Crested Butte, a telegraph line was
installed. John Davisson, now of 855 Elm St., Grand Junction, Colo.,
patrolled this line on snowshoes as “trouble shooter” during the Winters
of 1906-’07-’08.

The demonitization of silver in 1893 and the inability to get adequate
means of transportation for lead, zinc, and other ores, the town of
Crystal City was practically depopulated soon after the turn of the
century until 1916. Then it again looked as if the prospectors’ dream
might come true: the population again rose to several hundred; the Lead
King mine, the Black Queen mine, and the Sheep Mountain tunnel were
reopened; the smelter and concentration mill were reconditioned; a
blacksmith shop, cook house, and bunk houses were located two miles
above Crystal City on Rock Creek. But by the middle of 1917 everything
again shut down and the people drifted away.

Aug. 25, 1917, _Marble Booster_ newspaper:

  “Crystal mines are in their infancy. It would take a million men a
  thousand years to exhaust the hills up that way of their silver,
  copper, lead and zinc.”

Many interesting stories are told of the early days in Crystal City by
some of its first settlers. One told by F. W. (Dad) Reyland was that one
wintery day when the snow had drifted above the doors of many of the
buildings, they decided to liven things up a bit by having a dance. Now
the dance hall was one of the buildings completely covered by snow. So
they decided to tunnel in to the door, making niches in the sides of the
tunnel in the snow every few feet in which to anchor candles to guide
the guests to the dance hall. The dance was a huge success and stirred
the town out of its boredom.

Another was told by one who was working in the Colorado Trading &
Development Co. store at the time. During the winter months the mail was
brought up from Marble by a carrier on snowshoes, who as a rule could
get through with very little trouble. But once when a very deep feathery
snow had fallen he was unable to get through for over a week. The egg
supply at the store was exhausted; so they decided to send a man down to
try to get some. He made it down all right but had to wait several days
for the snow to crust over before coming back. Then he carried the case
of eggs strapped on his shoulders the six miles back to Crystal City. In
the meantime the price of eggs soared.

In 1938 Emmet S. Gould of Aspen came to Crystal City looking for ore to
run through a recently purchased mill. He became interested at once in
the area not only for its potential mineral wealth, but also its wild
beauty. He bought several mining claims and city lots with their cabins.

    [Illustration: DEADHORSE MILL—just below Crystal City. One of the
    earliest mills built on the Crystal River.
             —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte,  Glenwood Springs, Colo.]

    [Illustration: SNOW BRIDGE—across the Crystal River below the
    Devil’s Punch Bowls. It usually melts by September, but has been
    known to stay the year ’round. It is caused by slides on each side
    of the Canyon.
             —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte,  Glenwood Springs, Colo.]

He made an effort to open the Lucky Boy and the Lead King mines, but
unfortunate circumstances once again kept the mines from paying.

His daughters, Mrs. Dorothy Tidwell and Mrs. Helen Collins, and
granddaughters, Maxine Fowler and Carolyn Lodge, all of California,
still come with their families and friends, and make up a part of
Crystal City’s 20 or 30 summer residents.

The Welcome J. Neals who also own mining claims and a house in Crystal
City, come every year from Mooresville, Ind., and bring their friends
and relatives for a delightful summer’s vacation where the weather is
just right, the scenery unsurpassable, and the elusive trout waiting to
match his skill against that of the tourist.

Dick CarScadden of Aspen spends his summers in Crystal City conducting
tourists on hiking trips: the food and camping equipment being carried
by huskies.

Just what the future holds for Crystal City, none can say. The people
who own it prefer to keep it as it is, a cool, peaceful relaxing haven.
But with the road over Schofield Pass connecting Crested Butte with
Marble and Carbondale open, and with the known mineral deposits there,
it may again become a thriving mining center.

The Crystal River continues on its way through its narrow canyon,
sometimes on a level with the highway, sometimes hundreds of feet below
it.

Half way between Crystal City and Marble the river passes Lizzard Lake,
one of the most beautiful in Colorado. It is supposed to be the crater
of an old volcano. It is quite shallow around the edges for several feet
out, then drops abruptly to unknown depths. The Game & Fish Department
keeps it well stocked with trout and even amateur fishermen can land
their legal limit. This is one of the highly mineralized spots in the
valley: gold, silver, copper, etc.

    [Illustration: THEODORE (SGT.) JACKSON—ready to start on a pack-trip
    from Schofield Park into the high country.
                 —_Photo courtesy_ Theodore (Sgt.) Jackson, Delta, Colo.]

    [Illustration: DICK CarSCADDEN—packed and ready to start from
    Crystal City on one of his guided treks into the wilderness.
                         —_Photo courtesy_ Dick CarScadden, Aspen, Colo.]




                    _MARBLE, A Lovely Little Hamlet_


  In a Lovely Glen, named for a Lovely White Calcium Carbonate—Marble
                        (_Elevation 7,950 Feet_)

The Crystal River next reaches the valley where the town of Marble is
located. The Spanish explorers, Escalante and Dominquez, may have come
into this territory in 1541, but they left no permanent records. The
“Forty-Niners” were supposed to have come this far off their beaten
trail on their way to California; gold pans and other mining equipment
were found near Prospect Ranch by Bill Gant who trapped beaver in this
valley in 1859. Benjamin Graham prospected in the Elk Mountains in the
early 1860s. These early explorations are legendary and no accurate
information is recorded.

Neither the Ute Indians who silently followed the trails of mountain
sheep, elk, deer, and bear through the parks and meadows, green with
succulent grasses and gay and fragrant with wild flowers, nor the early
prospectors who tramped the mossy banks of the limpid streams, snaring
the sunning trout from their pebbly beds, tracking the beaver and marten
for their warm pelts, or roaming the mountain peaks in search of
precious metals, realized that the white rock that stood out on
precipitous mountain sides was more valuable than all the animal pelts
and precious metals they sought.

George Yule, a prospector who came into Gunnison County in 1874, is
supposed to have been the first white man to discover and assume the
value of the white marble up Yule Creek which still bears his name. He
was the first elected sheriff of Gunnison County, served two terms,
1878-’82. However he did not prove up on his claims, and they were taken
over by Wm. Wood and W. D. Parry in 1882.

The first prospectors to attempt a permanent settlement in the valley
were John Mobley and W. F. Mason who located their settlement east of
Carbonate Creek and called it Clarence; and William Wood and W. D. Parry
who made their camp near the mouth of Yule Creek and named it Marble.
When the settlements reached a population large enough to warrant a post
office, it was located west of Carbonate Creek, and Marble was the name
chosen for it.

Sizable amounts of lead and zinc had been discovered in this treasure
vault of the Rockies and the ore was being packed out on burros to
Crested Butte. This being a very slow means of transportation as well as
very expensive, attempts were made to locate a smelter nearer. Finally
in 1897 the Hoffman Smelting & Reduction Co. built one just across the
Crystal River south of Marble. It ran until 1900.

But the town of Marble did not boom until the value of marble was fully
realized. The first quarry was opened on the east side of Yule Canyon in
1892 by J. C. Osgood and one block of marble was taken out at a cost of
$1,700 to be sent to the World’s Columbian Exposition (1893) in Chicago.
In 1895-97 some blocks were hauled to Carbondale to be shipped east by
freight. But it was not until the beginning of the 1900s that the Yule
Quarry was opened on the west side of the canyon. Besides the pure white
marble there is a great amount of Colorado cloud marble (a smoky mottled
grain), serpentine (mottled green), pink, blue, and black (mottled with
white and green), found up this canyon.

About this same time two more quarries were opened on the east side of
Yule Canyon: the Strauss, by a company of eastern stockholders who built
the broad gauge Strauss railroad from Marble to the foot of their quarry
on Treasure Mountain; and the White Marble Co. owned by the Mormon
Church. While all the development work was completed, no commercial work
was ever done by either company and the railroad was never used.

In 1905 a road was cut out on the west side of the canyon and Yule
Quarry was started. At first they hauled the marble out on burro pack
trains which unloaded their burden in Marble and proceeded seven miles
to the Placita mines where they were loaded with coal to be delivered
and used at the quarry. There were two of these trains, each composed of
40 burros; one was in the charge of Walter Webb, the other was handled
by John Davisson.

Mr. Davisson told me of the above incident; also told another good tale
about the early days in Marble. It seems they had a town marshal by the
name of Schuyler Hodson who stood “ace-high” with the workmen. Whenever
they imbibed a little too freely and became troublesome, he didn’t throw
them in jail but tried to get them to go home peaceably and sober up. If
they refused to do this, he would take off his badge and gun, and giving
them a good thrashing until they agreed to do as he asked.

The following is a copy of a letter received from Mr. Davisson:

                                   855 Elm Street, Grand Junction, Colo.
                                                           Oct. 14, 1958

  Dear Mrs. Francis,

  In reply to yours of Oct. 10th. I had charge of the telegraph line
  from Crystal to Crested Butte from 1906 to 1908 inclusive.

  I ran the jack train from 1905 until 1908. It might interest you to
  know I packed a 6-hole range to the top of Whitehouse Mountain; had
  two jacks, 2×6 timbers lashed to the saddles and the stove in between.
  It was a zigzag trail and it took three men to turn the jacks on each
  turn. They said it couldn’t be done, but we did it.

  I am sending you a list of some of the old timers and what they did.
  You might want to use some of it. I have forgotten a lot of them;
  after all it was over fifty years ago.

    Joe Fausson           ran a saloon
    Bob Aahern            ran a saloon
    Frank Tracy           ran a saloon
    Schuyler Hodson       ran a saloon and was town marshal
    Dan Barnes            road overseer
    Al Hodges             stage driver from Placita to Crystal
    Henry Kirk            teamster, jack train owner
    Charles Bemis         teamster, jack train owner
    Jack Clayton          teamster
    Dr. Fuller            Confederate Civil War veteran
    Editor Evans          put out paper when sober
    Jim Downing           hunter, kept lion and bear dogs
    Frank Dickens         hunter, kept lion and bear dogs
    Henry L. Johnson      photographer

  Hope this will help a little. Sorry I haven’t a picture of the jack
  trains.

                                                              Good Luck,
                                             (_Signed_) John E. Davisson

    [Illustration: ALONG THE CRYSTAL RIVER—Scene two miles below Marble
    near the airport.
                —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte, Glenwood Spgs., Colo.]

The broad (standard) gauge railroad was extended from Placita to Marble
in 1906. The first train came up to Marble November 3, 1906. By this
time they were using a donkey engine to bring the marble down from the
quarry.

In 1908 Wm. McManus was brought in to assist Homer Harrington, general
superintendent of construction, in installing a hydro-electric power
house northeast of Marble. Three water pipelines were run into the
plant: one from Crystal River, one from Yule Creek, and the other down
Lost Trail Creek. They installed a transformer house half way up to the
quarry to convert electricity from direct to alternating current. High
tension lines were run to the mill and to the quarry, and all the
company houses were wired for electricity. Upon the completion of all
this, work was really in production.

It took the trained mind of an engineer, Commodore A. J. Mitchell, to
see value in the calcium carbonate (marble) deposits that had taken eons
to form and place in such a position that man could extract large blocks
from their beds; it took the indominable courage and optimism of a man
like Col. C. F. Meek to see the possibilities of developing an industry
that would make Colorado famous; it took the foresight and energy of the
promoter, the engineer, and the mechanic; it took the architect, Harry
Bacon, to see the possibilities of erecting a monument of the
translucent white marble from the Yule quarries to the memory of the
great statesman, Abraham Lincoln.

During the years 1908-16 Marble was really a lively little city. It
boasted five general stores, a drug store, a drygoods store, two hotels,
two large school buildings, two barber shops, two weekly papers—_The
Marble City Times_ and _The Marble Booster_—picture show, Masonic Hall,
two pool halls, and six saloons. I have talked to many of the really
“old timers” about the probable population at that time, and the number
varies from 1,500 to nearly 10,000. According to the “Company News”
column printed each week in the _Marble Booster_ newspaper the pay roll
varied from 700 to 850 names. So taking into consideration the number of
women and children who must have been here, the population could easily
have been several thousand.

On the morning of March 20, 1912, a big snow slide came down Mill
Mountain. As it occurred after the night shift had gone home and before
the day shift had come to work, no lives were lost but the property
damage was very heavy. The _Marble Booster_ newspaper in writing about
the slide had this to say:

  “While the slide was very bad, so well had the cleaning up and repair
  work been done, that within three days every worker was again plying
  his trade.”

The _Marble Booster_, Sept. 14, 1912:

                          BAD SMASH ON TROLLEY
   Four Persons Meet Death as Result of Runaway Train on the Highline

Four persons met death as a result of an accident on the trolley line
here last Friday a few minutes before noon.

The dead are:

  George Healy, motorman of the train.
  Robert P. Lytle, a brakeman.
  Atansio Negrete, a Mexican passenger.
  Mary Tonko, a Polish girl.

In some manner Healy, the motorman, lost control of a heavily loaded
train at a point on the line near the old smelter, half a mile from the
yard at the mill. Doubtless the airbrakes failed to work. Before the
hand brakes could be set the train attained a frightful speed. W. C.
Goodwin, a mill employee who was riding on the train, jumped and landed
without a scratch. The others stayed on the train.

Just before reaching the bridge over the Crystal River two of the cars
in the train left the track and smashed into a rock cliff at the side of
the track. Lytle, the brakeman, was on one of these cars. He was thrown
with terrible force into the face of the cliff and death was mercifully
quick.

Healy, the motorman, stayed with the balance of the train, as did the
Mexican and the little girl. The runaway cars held the track until the
turn at the loading station in the yards, when everything turned over on
the curve and smashed into splinters. Healy was caught beneath a huge
block of marble and was crushed to death. He probably never knew what
struck him. The Mexican was slammed onto the ground with such force that
death was instantaneous. The little girl, eight years old, was alive
when rescuers reached the scene and was hurried to the hospital. She
died at six o’clock that evening.

Col. C. F. Meek owned controlling interest in the Colorado Yule Marble
Co. composed of stockholders from Philadelphia and other eastern cities,
and was the president and general manager. Knowing how to handle men as
well as finances he was very popular with the company employees. Under
his management orders came pouring in and soon Colorado Yule marble was
being used all over the United States: From Houston, Tex. to Chicago,
Ill.; from Washington, D. C., and New York City to Portland, Ore., Los
Angeles and San Francisco, Calif.

    [Illustration: INTERIOR OF QUARRY—One of the “rooms” with floor
    space—30,000 square feet—producing 3,000 cubic feet of marble per
    day.
                             —_Photo by_ Henry L. Johnson, Marble, Colo.]

Col. Meek especially loved his home and family, and managed to spend
much time with them regardless of other interests. In addition to being
a good manager he was very liberal and considerate of his employees and
the town in general. Although a Protestant himself he did donate two
lots on Park Avenue to the Catholic Church and was donating marble with
which to erect the building, the company employees were donating their
labor. The corner stone was laid Oct. 12, 1912, and the church was named
“Saint Columbus Catholic Church of Marble.” Father Carrigan of Glenwood
Springs officiated at the dedication. Father was a personal friend of
Col. Meek and was always entertained at his home on his visits to
Marble. He often said the colonel was the best read man he ever knew,
always being interested in literature, music, and art, and could
converse intelligently on all subjects. The colonel was seriously
injured August 10, 1912, on a runaway trolley car coming down from the
quarry and died four days later. The new management, not being quite so
liberal, would not donate the marble to complete the building so work
stopped. After a few years a small wooden structure was built on the
front half of the foundation, but green lumber was used and it was
poorly constructed; so after a few years it sagged, was condemned, and
taken down in 1924. But the marble foundation still stands, a memorial
to one of the greatest philanthropists Marble ever had.

J. F. Manning was elected president and general manager of the company
Oct. 1, 1913. While he was still eastern sales agent for the company he
learned that a memorial to the memory of Abraham Lincoln was to be built
in Washington, D. C., and went after the contract. This took
considerable doing as samples of marble from all over the world were
being sent to Washington.

  “To determine the question, whether or not this marble was
  artistically superior to others, Secretary Garrison referred the
  matter to the National Fine Arts Commission, which on January 22, 1914
  reported as following:

  “‘The Commission of Fine Arts at their meeting held today, gave
  careful consideration to your letter of Jan. 17, 1914, requesting
  their advice upon certain questions arising in connection with the
  selection of marble suitable for the construction of the Lincoln
  Memorial. The Commission made a careful inspection of all samples
  submitted and have the honor to transmit the following:

  “‘The artistic qualities of Colorado Yule marble as compared with
  others submitted, in the opinion of the Commission of Fine Arts, fit
  it pre-eminently for a structure of the character of the Lincoln
  Memorial.’”[1]

    [Illustration: BLOCK OF MARBLE—for the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier
    being brought down from the quarry on electric train Feb. 3, 1931.
                             —_Photo by_ Henry L. Johnson, Marble, Colo.]

    [Illustration: PILLARS AND BLOCKS—support pillars for crane tracks
    and blocks of marble left in the yard when Colorado Yule Marble Co.,
    branch of Vermont Marble Co. ceased operations in 1942.
                —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte, Glenwood Spgs., Colo.]

    [Illustration: BLOCK OF MARBLE—for the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier
    loaded on a flat car to be shipped east. This is the largest single
    block of marble ever quarried in the world.
                             —_Photo by_ Henry L. Johnson, Marble, Colo.]

The contract for the Lincoln Memorial was obtained March 10, 1914, and
was to be completed in two years. It was finished late in 1915, several
months ahead of time. During this time several other large buildings
were also completed. (See listing of buildings made of Colorado marble.
pp. 46 & 47.)

The following information was obtained from “A Statement to the
Stockholders of the Colorado Yule Marble Company by J. F. Manning”:

World conditions in 1916 coupled with the huge indebtedness accumulated
when opening the quarry, building the mill, buying the necessary
machinery, building and equipping the power house, extending the
railroad from Placita to Marble, and the vast amount of accrued
interest, put the company in very bad financial straits. Then World War
I coming on, contracts could not be obtained, so the Colorado Yule
Marble Co. went into the hands of a receiver July 16, 1916, and remained
closed until April, 1922.

The property was then divided into four parts: the mill, the quarry, the
power house, and the railroad. Eventually it was put up for sale and was
bought by different parties all interested in one thing, forming one
company and putting it on a paying basis. Through the efforts of
Commodore A. J. Mitchell the Carrara Yule Marble Company was formed and
work was resumed in 1922. On July 24, 1924 the Colorado Consolidated
Yule Marble Co. (CCYMC) was formed and was again put up for sale.

On November 18, 1924, Mr. J. B. Jones of the Gray-Knox Marble Co. of
Knoxville, Tenn., purchased the stock of the CCYMC and leased the
Crystal River & San Juan Railroad with option to buy. Then the name was
changed again; this time to Tennessee-Colorado Marble Co., and as such
was operated until July 2, 1926, at which time arrangements were made to
return the plant and properties to the CCYMC.

This reversion was brought about in a large measure due to the fact that
the fabricating plant was partially destroyed by fire April 6, 1926. The
loss in machinery and equipment in shops Nos. 3 and 4, and mill B,
together with the building was appraised at sound value by disinterested
engineers at approximately $531,000.00.

About half of the part destroyed was immediately rebuilt and operations
to complete their contracts were resumed.

On December 20, 1927, a rental lease and purchase agreement was made
between the company and Mr. Jacob F. Smith of New York and a little
later he sold to the Vermont Marble Co. who (to this date, 1959) still
own the quarry.

While the City of Marble never reached its former status, it was a
thriving place, employing several hundred men and marble was once again
being shipped to all parts of the United States.

The contract for the block of marble suitable for the tomb of the
Unknown Soldier was obtained in 1930, and the largest block of marble
(100 tons) ever quarried in the world was cut out early in 1931. It was
moved out onto the floor of the quarry and sawed down to specifications,
56 tons plus one ton to be taken off in the finishing. It was lowered
down the tramway guided by huge cranes, to the trolley track at the foot
of the mountain. Then with one trolley in front (Elmer Bair, motorman)
and another behind (Johnny Fenton, motorman) weighted and tied together,
it was skidded on the rails down to the mill; taking three days to go
the 3.9 miles, arriving at the mill February 3, 1931. Special night and
day guards to prevent souvenir hunters from chipping it for momentoes,
were stationed near the block the four days it was in the yard. Then it
was placed on a flat car, crated, braced and started on its way to
Proctor, Vermont. There it was trued to perfection with surveyor’s
instruments and sent to Arlington Cemetery, Washington, D. C., where the
company sculptors carved the designs on it.

The Vermont Marble Co.’s branch, Colorado Yule Marble Co., continued to
operate both the quarry and the mill until the rumblings of World War
II, 1941 were being heard. Some of the employees were going back to
Europe, some were volunteering to go into the service here in the United
States, all steel was going into defense, and contracts could not be
obtained, so there was nothing to do but close down again.

August 9, 1941 was a hot sultry day, dark ominous clouds covered the
heavens, and a few big drops of rain began to fall. There were several
deafening claps of thunder and zigzagging streaks of lightning crossed
the sky. Then it all seemed to pass away. I was going about my work as
usual when one of my neighbors, Mrs. George T. Harris (nee Anna
Reheuser) hurried through the back door. “Oh, Mrs. Herman,” she
screamed, “the town is being washed away.”

“Oh, go on with you,” I answered, “it isn’t even raining.”

“I’m not joking, there’s been a cloudburst up Carbonate Creek and the
whole town is being washed away.”

The cloud had burst about three miles up the canyon and the water had
backed up behind some beaver dams and log jams which had been unable to
withstand the pressure and it had all come down at one time, cutting a
swath a block wide through the entire town, north to south, to the
Crystal River. The property damage was heavy, but no lives were lost.

Another cloudburst occurred July 31, 1945, in very much the same way and
approximately at the same time of day. While this one did carry more
water and spread over a greater area, the damage had been done four
years previous, so we didn’t feel so badly about it.

The mill closed November 15, 1941, and the last payday at the quarry was
January 15, 1942. The company had decided that this time instead of
keeping caretakers here to look after their property, they would sell
everything but the quarry, and when conditions warranted their reopening
they would come with new buildings and new machinery and do things the
modern way instead of as they were done when the quarry first opened in
1906.

The marble scattered along the right-of-way between Marble and
Carbondale are not the result of railroad cars overturning, but were
deliberately placed there as ballast to prevent the river undermining
the tracks. They are mostly the trimmings cut from building blocks, and
the larger pieces are rejects, pieces with fissures, points of flint, or
streaks of lime in them.

The single grave two miles below Marble to the left going out, is that
of John C. McKee who contracted pneumonia in Schofield. His friends,
thinking he just had a severe cold, were attempting to take him on
horseback to a doctor in Carbondale. There was no road between Marble
and Carbondale at that time, just a horse trail. He died when nearing
Marble. It being a hot day and realizing they couldn’t possibly reach
Carbondale for two more days, they decided it best to bury him there.

The little cemetery farther down the road to the east was not there at
that time. It was started much later. Many ask if there had been an
epidemic here at one time: so many baby graves. No, according to the
oldest residents of Marble there had never been an epidemic here to
their knowledge. The many infant graves there belonged to foreigners who
considered childbirth an every day occurrence and no necessity for
calling a doctor. So the infant mortality was very high.

The huge piles of marble near town are not rejects, neither were they
washed there by floods. Marble doesn’t wash; and the floods never came
near them. They are the old stock yards where marble was stored until
needed in the mill.

    [Illustration: BEFORE—Colorado Yule Marble Mill as it was in 1942.
    It was 1,700 ft. long and from 100 to 150 ft. wide. At the time it
    was built (1906-08) it was the largest marble fabricating plant in
    the world, employing nearly 1,000 workers.
                             —_Photo by_ Henry L. Johnson, Marble, Colo.]

    [Illustration: AFTER—Old Mill Site as it is today after the huge
    building had been dismantled and torn down in 1943. The machinery
    had been sold to Morse Bros. Reconditioning Co., Denver, Colo., and
    the building to Holly Campbell, Grand Junction, Colo.
              —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte, Glenwood Springs, Colo.]

The tall marble columns in the mill yard are not supports for the
building, but were supports for the crane tracks used when moving large
blocks.

Elmer Bair is another person who has great faith in the valley. He went
to work for the Colorado Yule Marble Co. in 1927 as a sawyer; after six
months he was given the job as motorman on one of the trolleys. He held
this position for four years—excepting the winters of 1929 and 1930 when
he carried the mail on snowshoes and skis up to the mines on Schofield
Pass.

Quoting from a letter received from Elmer Bair:

  “The year the company purchased the electric snowplow Bus Long was the
  motorman and he was afraid to come off the hill with the big plow so
  it was left standing on the side track until mid-winter and the road
  was snowed in. The company asked Pop Sampson to open the road. He took
  the car crew and 12 other men with shovels to go get it out. I was one
  of the 12. When we got there and shoveled out the plow and side track,
  Pop asked me if I would run the fan on the plow. Everyone was tense
  and excited. The motorman most of all. The plow had never been tried
  out and no one knew whether the brakes would hold or not; and the road
  between the quarry and the town was known to be the ‘steepest,
  slickest, smoothest railroad in the world.’ Captain Bill Hafner showed
  me an article in a magazine called Rock of Ages, published somewhere
  in the east, making that assertion.

  “We got along pretty well until we got on top of the hill at the
  rotary station, the motors were warmed up, the brakes were hot, and
  everything in excellent shape if we had only kept coming down. But the
  hill looked pretty steep and the motorman welcomed a chance to relax;
  so we all went into the station, ate our lunch, and rested about an
  hour. The plow was chained to the rail and the brakes were set, so we
  were sure everything was alright. We stayed just long enough for those
  hot brakes and wheels to form ice and freeze hard. I started the fan
  and Long unchained the plow and started releasing the air a little at
  a time until the air was all gone or released, and there we stood on
  the brow of that steep hill. The grade immediately ahead was 17 per
  cent.

  “Bus next applied one notch of electricity, or juice, as we called it.
  It just stood there and hummed. Then he gave it two notches, and it
  still hummed. He then applied three notches and it broke loose—all at
  once! And we were over the hill at a fast speed. Being excited the
  motorman applied all the brakes we had, and set all the wheels. We
  were in a dangerous runaway; the outfit completely out of control.

  “There was only one door and that was on the uphill side. Pop gave
  orders to jump to save our lives, and he led the way. As one would get
  ready to jump—a tree, or a trolley pole, or a ledge would show up
  right in the face of the one trying to find a space wide enough to
  make a safe landing. The snow was deep and jumping at that rate of
  speed made some comical sights; some landing on others and rolling
  down the hill together. I, having a greater sense of humor than good
  common sense, was having the laugh of my life until only two of us
  remained.

  “Bus was like a chicken with its head off, running from his controls
  in front, to the door in the middle of the car. He, being the motorman
  naturally wanted to be the last man off. He yelled in my ear and said,
  ‘Hurry up and jump, so I can.’ I said, ‘Go ahead and jump. No-one is
  holding you.’ I was having too much fun to miss seeing him take his
  spill. Each jump was more comical on account of the increased speed.

  “After I was left alone in this mad race that looked as if it might
  end in death, I began to see the more serious side of things and
  decided it was time for me to act in some way to save myself. The
  least I could do before making my exit would be to shut off the motor
  that ran the fan. After doing so the snow, not being able to go
  through the plow, began to pile up in front; within seconds the snow
  was piled high as the plow and the speed began to slacken off. No one
  but me, will ever know the feeling of comfort and relief that came
  over me.

  “Then Sampson and the boys came running—some limping—down the track,
  expecting to find me and the plow piled at the bottom of the hill,
  instead there I sat with my feet hanging out the door, still laughing.
  They did not know that there had been a spell of soberness between
  then and the time they had left me.

  “Bus Long was through being motorman and I was drafted to that
  position. After I quit in the fall of 1931, Frank Morse, who had been
  continuously with the company through all their operations, told me I
  was the only motorman who had run the trolley car any length of time
  without having at least one crackup in a runaway.

  “When the big marble block for the tomb of the Unknown Soldier was
  taken out, there were two motormen who brought it down. I was the head
  motorman hooked to the front, and Johnny Fenton was hooked on the back
  with his motor.”
                                                   (_Signed_) Elmer Bair

Elmer Bair left the company employment Sept. 30, 1931, and leased all
the company’s range land and ran sheep in 1932. He purchased the
Chidester, Cookman, Barnes, and Baroni places—approximately 1,000
acres—in 1935. And in 1952 he bought approximately 1,700 acres from the
company and now runs 2,100 sheep in this area every summer.

Our tourists with very few exceptions are awed and thrilled by our
magnificent scenery. George Rosenberg, managing editor of the _Tucson
Daily Citizen_, Tucson, Ariz. is no exception. He and his family
vacationed in Marble and Carbondale for the first time in 1958. His
enthusiasm for Marble is recorded in a story with pictures, he published
in the _Citizen_, Aug. 2, 1958, where he says:

  “If you haven’t taken your vacation yet, and if you think you can talk
  the little monsters out of going back to Disneyland ... if either of
  these shoes fits, then take my advice ... head for the Hills of
  Marble.”

John Chapman, dramatic critic (New York _Daily News_), whose hobby is
vacation travel, wandered through some ghost towns in his native state
of Colorado, took pictures, and wrote an article extolling the grandeur
of the Crystal River Valley. This article together with colored pictures
appeared in _Sports Illustrated_, Oct. 7, 1957.

Mrs. Robert J. Hall is another short story writer who visited in Marble
in the fall of 1958. She wrote an article which appeared in the _Weekly
Star Farmer_, Kansas City, Mo., Jan. 21, 1959, describing the beauty and
resources of the Crystal River Valley in general and Marble in
particular.

After the Vermont Marble Co. pulled out, things were rather dull for a
few years, then it began to forge ahead as a tourist attraction. Good
fishing and hunting, a delightful summer climate, and scenery that can
not be duplicated, bring in more and more people every year and it is
fast becoming one of the better resort sections of the western slope. It
is often referred to as “The Swiss Alps of the United States.”

At present Beaver Lake Lodge and Cabins owned and operated by the Wade
C. Loudermilks, formerly of Buckeye, Ariz., is the only tourist
accommodation in Marble. But once a person stays in the clean, modern
cabins or partakes of the delicious meals served in the lodge, he is
sure to return again and again. Other popular services of the lodge are
their horse and jeep tours (operated as an insured common carrier) to
the various mountain tops of 12,000 feet or more, and the licensed
guided pack trips into the wilderness areas.

    [Illustration: ST. PAUL’S EPISCOPAL CHURCH—Marble, Colo., building
    moved from Aspen, Colo., in 1909. Bell and altar donated by Mrs.
    Mortimer Proctor of Proctor & Gamble Soap Co. Now used as a
    community church. Any denomination welcome to conduct services here.
                       —_Photo courtesy_ Glen L. Gebhardt, Denver, Colo.]

The Loudermilks and the Frank Rehs, formerly of Washington, D. C., now
of Glenwood Springs, Colo., are undertaking a vast land development (700
acres) two miles below Marble paralleling the Crystal River. This is
primarily a subdivision for home sites, consisting of approximately 75
tracts that have been surveyed and filed with the Gunnison County
recorder. Part of their program calls for an airstrip 5,200 feet long
(3,800 feet now completed) and a small business district consisting of
hangars, gas pumps, restaurant, curio shop, et cetera.

The Basic Chemical Corporation was organized by Carl Morse in the early
1950s. They bought the Old (Marble) Mill Site from Elmer Bair and
installed a rock crusher, intending to make a number of products from
the marble left there by the Vermont Co. These were to include marble
chips for roofs, smaller pieces for macadam and cement work, chicken
grits, dust for strengthening and whitening plaster, and fertilizer for
sweeting sour ground.

This was not as successful as it was hoped it would be, and was leased
to Vance Baker of Grand Junction in 1957. He now runs it during the
summer months and confines most of the work to the making of marble
chips. He expects to enlarge his operations to the point where he can
cut and sell building blocks, using the trimmings for chips.

The Crystal River flows on down the valley another 3½ miles through
Prospect Ranch, once a part of the Osgood Estate of Redstone, purchased
from it by the Darien Brothers—Henry, James, and Gus. Now it is a
popular summer resort, Prospect Ranch Cabins, owned by Jim and Gus
Darien and run by the Gus Dariens of Carbondale.

Any article or series of articles treating of the advantages of the
Crystal River Valley as a vacationing playground would not be complete
without mentioning one of the prettiest camping and fishing spots in the
state, Bogan Flats—located five miles below Marble. The Forestry
Department supplies the tables, seats, fireplaces, and restrooms. There
are many quiet nooks in the river where the ingenious trout lurks and
seldom does any fisherman go away empty-handed.

Next, the river flows through Chair Mountain Ranch, also once a part of
the Osgood Estate. The Earl Z. McCullys bought it from Mrs. Lucille
Osgood McDonald in 1943, had it ready to open as a guest ranch in 1947,
and ran it as such until the fall of 1952 when they sold it to the Ray
Somers of Mountain View, Calif., and Mr. and Mrs. (formerly Mrs. Lola
Kemp) C. H. Patterson of Farmington, N. Mex.

    [Illustration: PERFECT MARBLE CORE—this speaks more eloquently for
    quality of marble produced up Yule Canyon than any words possibly
    could. In “pulling” cores they usually break at much shorter
    lengths.
                             —_Photo by_ Henry L. Johnson, Marble, Colo.]

One evening several of us from this neighborhood were spending a social
evening together discussing the various escapades pulled by dude guests.
One in particular seemed especially amusing: When the McCullys were
still running the ranch, a number of their guests wanted to go for a
long horseback ride up in the mountains. “Should you become lost,” he
told them, “just tie the reins, drop them on the horses’ necks, and give
them their heads; they’ll come home all right.” Sure enough they became
lost, so dismounted and did as Mr. McCully had instructed them to do.
The horses returned to the ranch all right—riderless. It took the
McCullys several hours to find the guests.

“Well, we shouldn’t laugh at dudes, no matter how green,” said Lola,
“when we first bought the place we were the greenest dudes on the ranch.
Didn’t even know which side of a horse to mount.”

However, they have learned, and Chair Mountain Ranch is now a very
popular, well managed resort.

  The river flows on to Cleveholm, the famous Redstone castle, built in
  1903 by J. C. Osgood for his first wife, the “Lady Bountiful” of
  Redstone. Every Christmas all the children in the village were urged
  to write letters to Santa Claus. They were delivered to Mrs. Osgood
  and she personally saw to it that every child received what she or he
  asked for; not a cheap, shoddy toy, but the very best money could buy.

  One Christmas the school was giving a program and Christmas tree, to
  which all the people in Redstone had been invited. Right at the height
  of the festivities the wax candles on the tree set fire to the cedar
  branches. Some of the men quickly grabbed the tree and threw it
  through one of the windows, thus averting what might have been a
  terrible catastrophe. The parents were very grateful for the presence
  of mind and quick action of the men; the children were very downcast
  that their carefully planned and often rehearsed program had been so
  rudely interrupted and their beautiful Christmas tree ruined.

  The next year when Mr. Osgood had a firehouse built it was located on
  a lot adjoining the school house grounds.[2]

Cleveholm was patterned after an old English castle. It originally
contained 26 rooms, each with an immense fireplace. The wall coverings,
upholstering, and covers for the bookcases and reading tables in the
library were hand-tooled elephant hide. Light green silk brocade was
used for wall coverings, drapes, and upholstering in the music room.
Dark maroon plush decorated the walls in the dining room, and all the
wood work and furniture were mahogany. The parlor is an especially large
room, two full stories high on the inside, and lavishly furnished. It
also contained the famous Osgood coat-of-arms.

The tourist court across the river and highway from Cleveholm is Swiss
Village Resort owned by the Olyn Parkers of Denton, Tex. It was
originally the game-keeper’s house. They bought it in 1949 and have
added cabins and improvements every year since then.

The Parkers had spent several summers in various parts of Colorado and
had fallen in love with the majestic rugged scenery, the clear fresh
air, and the peace and quiet found along the mountain streams away from
the city. The idea of having a summer haven in Colorado grew on them
until they began corresponding with real estate men in different
sections of the state.

Irvin Jarvis, Glenwood Springs, Colo. wrote them that he believed he had
just the place they were looking for—his summer home above Redstone.
They were interested and arranged to meet him and his wife there on June
8, 1948. It was love at first sight, just the place they were looking
for—a place away from the city, in the beautiful high mountain country,
the sparkling Crystal River flowing just across the road, tall majestic
evergreen trees and lovely aspen gracing the scenery, and many deer,
elk, bear and other animals roaming the mountains. Needless to say they
bought the place.

The house and barn are of Swiss architecture, built in 1901 and were
originally a part of the John C. Osgood estate. The gamekeeper, William
Keir, lived here with his family and looked after the private herds of
deer, elk, and mountain sheep. Much of the high fence and original posts
which enclosed many acres as pasture for these wild animals, are still
standing.

Two of the Keir daughters visited the Parkers and related many
interesting anecdotes concerning the early life of the game park. One
deer they had tamed and named Dolly. She would often jump the high fence
and follow them to school. Then it would be their pleasant duty to skip
school and take Dolly back home.

Quoting from a letter received from Mrs. Parker, Jan. 19, 1959:

  “We started building cabins in 1949 and called our place Swiss Village
  Resort. Many nice guests came our way that first summer and stayed in
  our cabins. Since then many people—and they are such lovely
  people—have come our way and happy are the memories of their laughter
  ringing out over the place in summers and falls.

  “We derive genuine pleasure in seeing our guests happy. Most of them
  are people who love a quiet vacation away from cities, close to
  nature. Many enjoy riding into the high country to see nature at its
  best. So very many enjoy fishing while others like to ride, hike,
  rest, or play games. All of them, the same as we, love to hear the
  early history of Redstone, which is most interesting.

  “Fond are our memories of gatherings in the living room in front of a
  roaring fire in the huge fireplace listening to the guests tell of the
  big fish that got away, or the hunters tell of their day’s experiences
  in getting their elk, deer or bear.

  “Our fondest wish is to keep Redstone and the surrounding area always
  a place where people like to return year after year, and that God will
  grant us many more years to live in this lovely spot.

  “Yes, we love Redstone and to us the area in and near there is some of
  the most beautiful country we have ever seen. As we view the majestic,
  awe inspiring handiwork of God we feel very humble and grateful, and
  humbly say, ‘Thank you God, for the privilege of seeing and living in
  this lovely spot.’

  “Most sincerely,”
                                              (_Signed_) Virginia Parker

    [Illustration: SWISS VILLAGE RESORT—Lodge one mile above Redstone.
    It was originally the Osgood gamekeeper’s house.
                     —_Photo courtesy_ Mrs. Olyn Parker, Redstone, Colo.]

    [Illustration: OSGOOD MANOR—“Cleveholm” (across beautiful Crystal
    River from Swiss Village Resort) patterned after a castle in
    England.
                —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte, Glenwood Spgs., Colo.]




                      _REDSTONE, One Man’s Dream_


                     of an Ideal Village for Miners
                 (_Elevation Approximately 6,500 feet_)

John C. Osgood came to Colorado in the early 1880s to make a thorough
investigation of all the coal deposits in the state. Those up Coal
Creek, a branch of the Crystal River, seemed especially favorable for
his plan, and he was able to buy them from their original owners for a
few hundred dollars. The dream he had of building a model village for
miners in this valley did not materialize for almost twenty years. He
organized the Colorado Fuel Co. and later acquired the Colorado Coal &
Iron Co. and merged them into one—Colorado Fuel & Iron Co. (CF&I)—and
was its first president. Then he set out to carry through his dream and
built Redstone, a model village of 40 workmen’s cottages (each styled
and painted differently), a modern 40-roomed inn, a school house, a club
house, and a library; all electrically lighted and as modern as they
could be made at that time.

Every workman was given the opportunity of joining the club and making
use of the club rooms. Every member had his own locker and was urged to
come there after work and bathe or shower, and change into clean clothes
before appearing on the street. They elected their own officers and made
their own rules; one of which was especially good—treating was not
permissible.

The mines were up Coal Creek about 12 miles. There the miners had their
own little village in which they took great pride, vieing with Redstone
as to neatness and gardening.

All the buildings in this model village were constructed to last,
nothing of the overnight box-car type. Yet all this came to an end in
less than a decade. Rumor has it that Mr. Osgood became too ambitious:
he tried to “buck” John D. Rockefeller and J. P. Morgan. He ran out of
millions; they didn’t.

The scenic grandeur of the Crystal River cannot be excelled; sometimes
narrow canyons, precipitous cliffs and steep waterfalls; sometimes broad
valleys heavily wooded with stately ponderosa pine, Engelmann spruce,
Colorado green spruce, blue spruce, Douglas fir, the narrow leaf
cottonwood, and the quaking aspen; carpeted with waist high ferns,
Oregon grapes, and kinnikinnick (sometimes called Indian tobacco)
interspersed with brilliant flowers of every hue, and often rare plants
found only in much warmer climes. The reason? Perhaps they are remnants
of earlier geological ages; perchance the great combination and variety
of rainfall, heat and cold, shade and sunshine, and slope exposure have
their influences.

The natural resources are unsurpassable. It is an often stated fact that
the Crystal River area from Schofield to Redstone bears the heaviest
concentration of known minerals in the United States. Millions of
dollars worth of coal deposits, undeveloped; billions of dollars worth
of pure white marble waiting to be made into buildings, memorials, and
statuaries; gold, silver, copper, lead and zinc deposits that haven’t
been scratched. Yes, Mother Nature has been very generous in this
fabulous valley.

In its Aug. 25, 1917 issue the _Marble Booster_ had this to say just
before it permanently closed its doors:

  “Some day this valley will come into its own. Nature has certainly
  been very bountiful in its distribution of resources up and down the
  Crystal River Valley, but man has been lame, mighty lame, in
  developing the same. The right man may yet come along. Speed the day
  is our fervent wish.”

Perhaps this man has come along in the person of Frank E. Kistler who
has purchased the Osgood Estate and is busily engaged restoring the
property and making it into an all-year resort. He has added 36 rooms to
the already 40-room inn, built a glass enclosed swimming pool, and
constructed a children’s playground. He is selling home sites, erecting
homes, building a ski course, golf course, tennis courts, and minor
auxiliary recreational facilities.

Four miles below Redstone the Crystal River runs through a district that
contains several hot mineral springs that have medicinal value
comparable to any in the United States.

Soon the canyon widens, sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other,
into fertile meadows especially adapted to raising strawberries,
raspberries, cherries, and apples. A little farther on there are large
ranches bordering it. These raise potatoes, oats, alfalfa, and hay; they
all depend on the never failing Crystal River for irrigation. It also
runs through several stock (sheep and cattle) ranches before it reaches
the Roaring Fork River below Carbondale, then, on to join the Colorado
River below Glenwood Springs, thence to the Pacific Ocean.

    [Illustration: MT. SOPRIS—a majestic lone sentinel guarding the
    lower Crystal River Valley, as seen from the highway below
    Carbondale.
                —_Photo courtesy_ John B. Schutte, Glenwood Spgs., Colo.]




                _THESE PEOPLE Have Faith in the Valley_


Theodore (Sgt.) Jackson of Paonia, Colo., owns a cabin in Schofield and
keeps sixteen horses there during the summer for conducting tourist
trips to many remote points in the mountains.

The Cristenson Brothers graze 1,500 sheep every summer in the mountain
meadows high above Crystal City. They say this is the most ideal spot
for sheep grazing they have ever seen.

Ward C. Canaday, at one time president of Willys-Overland Motors, owns
several mining claims above Crystal and some buildings and lots in the
village. He expects that someday they will warrant his holding them the
past 20 years.

The Collins, Tidwells, and Fowlers are holding on to all their mining
claims and town property in Crystal City. They say if they never realize
all their investment, they will at least always have a wonderful place
to spend their vacations.

The Welcome Joe Neals of Mooresville, Ind., also have faith that their
investments in mining claims and property in Crystal will pay handsomely
as well as give them a favorite vacationing spot.

Judge C. C. McWilliams, of Gunnison, Colo., and his son, Carvel of
Cedarridge, Colo., still pay the taxes and do the assessment work on
their silver and gold claims above Lizzard Lake. And it is well they
should as there have been some very valuable specimens taken from them.

Jack Clemenson of Kansas City, Mo., has a cabin up Lost Trail Creek,
three miles above Marble, in which he spends his summers. He is studying
for the ministry and sometimes helps the young folks conduct services in
St. Paul’s Episcopal (Community) Church during the summer.

Thano Johnson, artist and head of the art department in the Willoughby,
Ohio, public schools, bought several lots and a house in Marble in 1945.
He has improved the house by remodeling the inside, installing two huge
fireplaces, and putting in several large plate-glass windows, until now
it is one of the show places of Marble.

The Williams Brothers moved their general store from Crystal City to
Marble in the early 1900s and ran it until 1942. John A. Williams had
the post office in the back of the store for 20 years. He and his
brother, C. Ambrose Williams, still come to Marble early in June every
year and return to their winter home in Phoenix, Ariz., early in
September.

Ted S. Wallace and Will L. Francis, employees of Tucson Newspapers,
Inc., Tucson, Ariz., have investments in real estate here and expect
someday to see Marble a strong tourist attraction.

Elmer Bair of Carbondale is probably the largest land owner in the
valley, approximately 2,700 acres. He has been grazing sheep in this
district for over 25 years and finds it a profitable investment. At
present he runs 2,100 sheep in the Marble area every summer.

The Holy Cross Electric Assn., George Thurston general manager, had
faith enough in the valley to extend a high tension electric line from
Glenwood Springs to Redstone, and working with the Mountain States Tel.
& Tel. Co. to install an all new electric and telephone line to Marble,
thus giving first class service in both utilities to all in the valley.

Dr. and Mrs. Vanderbosch and the George Vanderweits, all of Denver,
Colo., own a house in Marble that is in use most of the year by them or
some of their friends.

Mr. and Mrs. John Reheuser of Denver own several lots in Marble that
they have refused to sell since leaving here in 1942. They expect to
build on them in the near future.

The Wade G. Loudermilks of Buckeye, Ariz., are disposing of all their
holdings there and expect to invest everything in improving the Colorado
property they own with the Frank Rehs, late of Washington, D. C., now of
Glenwood Spgs. This is located at the Airport two miles below Marble and
is ideal for summer vacation cottages.

Mrs. Marie Ramsey, Colorado Springs, Colo., has a summer cabin in
Marble, and manages to make several trips there every summer.

Mr. and Mrs. Rome Isler own a house and a roadside stand, The Marble
Trading Post, in Marble. They come up from Carbondale every spring
before fishing season opens and stay until after hunting season in the
fall.

The Hunters of Glenwood Springs and the Barnards of Fowler, Colo., own a
cabin in Marble that they use as headquarters for their fishing trips in
the summer and hunting in the fall.

Vance Baker of Glenwood Springs has investment in a marble crushing
operation at the Old Mill Site in Marble. He expects to develop it into
a paying industry in the near future.

The Leo Pascals of Fort Collins, Colo. and La Paz, Bolivia, South
America, have a cabin in Marble that they expect to make more use of in
the future than they have during the past two years while stationed in
South America.

Mr. and Mrs. Paul Ganley of Buckeye, Ariz., maintain a summer home in
Marble, although it is rather far to come for a short vacation. Their
children insist they keep it so they can come for skiing in the winter.

Mr. and Mrs. Bob Lee of Denver and their four children, Edward, Nancy,
Pat, and Judy, have a cabin in Marble where they spend much time
horseback riding, hiking, picnicing and fishing every summer.

Mr. and Mrs. George T. (Anna) Harris own numerous lots and two cabins in
Marble and several mining claims in the Crystal City area, that they
feel confident will warrant their investment, and faith in the valley.

Mr. and Mrs. Ted S. (Marion) Wallace of Tucson, Ariz., have purchased
several lots and a house in Marble. They expect to modernize it and
spend part of their summers there away from the heat in Tucson.

Oscar McCullum, a government employee of Washington, D. C., has a summer
cabin in Marble. While his work takes him to all parts of the world, he
and his family manage to spend some time each year there. He says
there’s no place like Marble for complete relaxation.

Gunnison County spends a considerable sum of money in this district
every year keeping the seven miles of county road below Marble to the
Pitkin County line in repair, and the 12 miles of new road above Marble
to Schofield Pass in a passable condition. John Darien has been in
charge of the road work the past 10 years and does a very commendable
job.

The Ray Sommers of Mountain View, Calif., and the C. H. Pattersons of
Farmington, New Mex., have heavy investments in Chair Mountain Ranch
Resort, six miles below Marble, and are sure they will be well repaid
for their faith in the valley.

Mr. and Mrs. Olyn Parker, Denton, Texas, are another couple who have
shown their faith in the valley by investing in Swiss Village Resort one
mile above Redstone and are happy to see its increased popularity every
summer.

Reese Lewellyn of Glenwood Springs has charge of the Mid Continent Coal
& Coke Co. that is working the mines up Coal Creek and making coke in
Redstone. They are using a fleet of large trucks to haul their products
to the railroad at Carbondale. It is rumored that eventually the
railroad will be extended to Redstone to accommodate this growing
industry.

Frank E. Kistler has invested heavily in remodeling the castle and the
inn in Redstone. He has purchased this part of the Osgood Estate and it
will be second to none in the United States when he completes the
redesigning and additions he has planned.

Ben Turner of Albuquerque, New Mex., is another artist who has chosen
this valley as a setting for many of his pictures. He purchased a
residence in Redstone several years ago, has remodeled it and added a
large studio. He, his wife, and daughter now spend most of their time
there.

The O. R. Whites of Tucson, Ariz., have sold their property there and
have purchased a store and built a home in Redstone where they are now
doing a nice mercantile business.




                 _GLEANINGS From Old Valley Newspapers_


Some interesting, or at least amusing items taken from the _Crystal
River Current_, Crystal City, Colo.:

                              Oct. 9, 1886

  Bar silver $0.97 per oz.
  Lead $4.50 per 100 lbs.

Our miners are wondering if James N. Bennett, our next County
Commissioner, will do anything toward extending a wagon road up Crystal
River next fall.

Bill Benton came over the divide from Crested Butte on Monday with 75
jacks loaded with hay for the J. C. Osgood Coal Co. Hay and grain are
very scarce along the valley as the demand is greater than the supply.

                             Nov. 20, 1886

Sleighing is good over the divide and our roads could be kept open all
winter if there were a few more sleighs on the road. At present there
are six “fours” running between here and Crested Butte.

                             Nov. 27, 1886
                             WEDDING BELLS
                      The Phillips-Penny Marriage

About two weeks ago the friends of Mr. J. W. Phillips and Miss Olive
Penny received cards to be present at their wedding to take place
Thanksgiving Eve, at the residence of the bride’s parents, Mr. and Mrs.
H. D. Penny of Hot Springs, and the event had become the principal topic
of conversation. It was thought us old bachelors never would get “over
the fence,” but Mr. Phillips was the first to make the start.

All day Wednesday, despite the unfavorable weather, crowds could be seen
going to the Springs from Carbondale, Satank, and up the river, and by
dusk there were upwards of 30 present. At 8 o’clock the bride and groom
entered the room followed by Miss Alice Penny, sister of the bride, and
T. A. Boughton, who acted as bridesmaid and groomsman, to where the Rev.
J. Wallace Ohl, of Aspen, was in waiting with their friends who gathered
around. After Mr. Ohl pronounced them man and wife according to the
rights of the Episcopal Church, congratulations and hand shaking was in
order.

The bride’s costume was a rich satin with lace trimmings and orange
blossoms. Lying upon the table were numerous presents for the couple.
Dancing was indulged in until morning, and all expressed themselves as
having had a most enjoyable time.

                              Dec. 4, 1886

Quite a number of married ladies are leaving here at present for more
comfortable winter quarters. Future Bill of Fare for our bereaved
bachelors—bacon, beans, galvenized biscuits, and hunting case pies.

                             Dec. 11, 1886

  Latest New York quotations:
  Silver $1.00½ per oz.
  Lead $4.50 per 100 lbs.

                             Dec. 18, 1886

Citizens around Glenwood Springs and Carbondale are all anxious to see
the toll road built up the river as it would give them another outlet to
Crested Butte and in fact all Gunnison County would be benefitted by the
construction of the road.

Van Sycle & Co. are having their winter supplies packed up to their mine
on Avalanche Creek from Carbondale. Their property is looking fine.

                             Dec. 25, 1886

Not over 10 inches of snow in camp. How’s that for the 25th of December?

Roads over the Pass (Schofield) are blocked for the season and snowshoe
express is the only means of getting anything into this neck of the
woods.

                             Jan. 15, 1887

About 18 inches of snow fell around camp during our last storm.

                              June 6, 1887

Wagons will go over the divide (Schofield Pass) next week as the snow
has about all disappeared through the timber.

The Crystal and Prospect mail sack comes in chuck full these days,
making quite a load to be packed over the divide on a man’s back.

                             June 18, 1887

The route down our valley from Crested Butte to Carbondale and Glenwood
Springs is becoming quite popular for those traveling on horseback, as
the distance is considerable shorter and can be made in about two days.
If our wagon road were only completed there would be a large amount of
freighting done on this road and it would not be long before the mail
route would be extended down the valley.

                             June 25, 1887

The first team went over the divide (Schofield Pass) last Sunday. The
range is now cleared of snow and we can expect to see considerable
travel this season.

Ashby has opened up a good body of lead ore in the Crown Point on
Crystal Mountain. He has been working this property since 1876.

A post office has been established at Carbondale and W. M. Dinkle
appointed postmaster. This is quite a convenience to the rapidly growing
town. The old Satank (sometimes called Yellow Dog) post office is now at
Rockford about two miles farther down the valley.

                             Aug. 13, 1887

The Board of County Commissioners (Pitkin) met in special session
Monday. $800.00 was set aside to build a road up the Crystal
River.—_Aspen Times._

                             Sept. 10, 1887

50 coke ovens are to be erected near Glenwood Springs. The coke is to be
made from coal at Jerome Park.

                             Sept. 17, 1887

The citizens of Glenwood Springs contemplate holding a celebration upon
the arrival of the railroads. The Denver & Rio Grande (D&RG) is expected
to reach the Springs within the next two weeks, and the Midland will not
be far behind.

                             Sept. 24, 1887

A most attractive feature of the Midland railroad exhibit at the Denver
exposition are several marble specimens which they obtained from their
claims on Yule Creek. They have been polished in square blocks. This
exhibit will give visitors an opportunity to see the valuable resources
of this district.

The wagon road up the Crystal River from Carbondale is progressing quite
favorably and our citizens are in hopes it will be completed this fall.


              THE MARBLE CITY TIMES and Clarence Chronicle

                             Sept. 8, 1893

In the Little Jessie mine on Yule Creek, there is from four to six feet
of lead ore exposd in the workings, which runs well in lead and silver.
The ore body is opened up in two places and shows up well.

                              Dec. 1, 1893

While over the range they are struggling with from two to three feet of
snow, here we are having pleasant weather and a scant two inches of
snow, which is thawing.

                              Jan. 5, 1894

The bid on the mail route between Crested Butte and Gothic went for $276
per annum—just $23 per month—barely enough to pay for horse feed.
Evidently some one wants to walk and live on mountain scenery. Speaking
of mail contracts, Allan Hodges did not get his route by about $300.
Some poor hayseed is badly stuck.

                             Jan. 12, 1894

The Club held a special meeting last night and unanimously decided to
offer Corbett and Mitchell $75,000 each to have the fight come off at
Marble. In addition to this they offered to give the contestants a free
ride on Tucker’s bicycle line and a body guard to pass Cumming’s place;
a free bath at the Hot Springs; free hot Scotch at Leggetts, and a
marble monument to the one that gets killed.

                             Jan. 26, 1894

Marble failed to secure the Corbett-Mitchell fight.

                             Feb. 23, 1894

Bud Fisher had a hard trip to come from Crystal with the mail Wednesday.
He had to leave his horse in the Canyon and walk to town. The boys from
the Silver King shoveled the snow so as to get the horse out and brought
him in about three o’clock.

                             March 16, 1894

The people of Carbondale are a little excited over the discovery of gold
near there and up towards Mount Sopris. We understand that a large
number of claims have already been staked and that some very promising
rock is being shown around town.

                             April 4, 1894

A Coxey Army is talked of from Marble. A great interest is being taken
by our people in the industrial army.


A PARTIAL LIST OF BUILDINGS MADE ENTIRELY OR PARTIALLY OF COLORADO YULE
                                 MARBLE

  Lincoln Memorial                                     Washington, D. C.
  Tomb of the Unknown Soldier            Arlington Cemetery, Washington,
                                                                   D. C.
  Custom Houses (both old and new)                         Denver, Colo.
  Annex to the State Capitol                               Denver, Colo.
  City & County Building                                   Denver, Colo.
  Cheesman Memorial                                        Denver, Colo.
  Post Office                                              Denver, Colo.
  Colorado National Bank                                   Denver, Colo.
  Broadway Bank, interior                                  Denver, Colo.
  Union Depot                                              Denver, Colo.
  Metropolitan Building, interior                          Denver, Colo.
  Barth Mausoleum                                          Denver, Colo.
  Daniel & Fisher Building, interior                       Denver, Colo.
  Colorado State Museum                                    Denver, Colo.
  Immaculate Conception Cathedral                          Denver, Colo.
  Post Office                                             Greeley, Colo.
  Merritt Building                                   Los Angeles, Calif.
  Examiner Building                                  Los Angeles, Calif.
  Athletic Club                                      Los Angeles, Calif.
  Citizens National Bank, interior                   Los Angeles, Calif.
  Merchants National Bank, interior                  Los Angeles, Calif.
  Sub-Treasury Building                            San Francisco, Calif.
  San Francisco City Hall                          San Francisco, Calif.
  Huntington Mausoleum                                  Pasadena, Calif.
  Post Office                                           Pasadena, Calif.
  Rosehill Mausoleum                                       Chicago, Ill.
  Howard County Court House                               St. Paul, Neb.
  Court House                                              Greeley, Neb.
  West Lawn Mausoleum                                        Omaha, Neb.
  Lincoln High School                                      Lincoln, Neb.
  Bancroft High School                                     Lincoln, Neb.
  IOOF Building                                       Broken Arrow, Neb.
  Brandeis Subway                                            Omaha, Neb.
  First National Bank                                      Lincoln, Neb.
  Union Pacific Building                                     Omaha, Neb.
  Chapin Building                                          Lincoln, Neb.
  Douglas County Court House                                 Omaha, Neb.
  First National Exchange Bank                              Sidney, Neb.
  City Hall                                              Cleveland, Ohio
  Court House                                           Youngstown, Ohio
  Union National Bank, interior                            Houston, Tex.
  McKnight Building                                   Minneapolis, Minn.
  New York Municipal Building                       New York City, N. Y.
  Adams Hotel                                             Phoenix, Ariz.
  Mohave County Court House                               Kingman, Ariz.
  Enid High School                                           Enid, Okla.
  Tulsa High School                                         Tulsa, Okla.
  Telephone Building                                       Chicago, Ill.
  Wiedener Memorial                                     Cambridge, Mass.
  First National Bank                                     Portland, Ore.
  German-American Institute                               St. Louis, Mo.
  Citizens’ National Bank                               Evansville, Ind.
  Chambers Estate Building                              Kansas City, Mo.
  Montana Power House                                     Billing, Mont.
  Lind Mausoleum                                            Plover, Iowa
  Post Office                                           Pocatello, Idaho


                               MINE NAMES

While reading the papers published in Crystal City and in Marble in the
1880s and 1890s I came across many intriguing names and thought a list
of them might give you a little enjoyment.

The more familiar names were:

  The Lead King
  The Black Queen
  The Lucky Boy
  The Little Darling
  John Baroni Tunnel
  Sheep Mountain Tunnel
  Whopper Load
  The Inez
  Catalpa
  Copper King
  20th Century
  Winchester
  El Negoero
  North Pole

These were very important to someone at sometime, yet did very little
production:

  Highland Mary
  Painter Boy
  Robert E. Lee
  Bell of Merino
  Silver Cord
  Grass Widow
  Golden Harvest
  Gray Copper
  Mountain King
  Bay State
  A. C. Richmond
  Forest Queene
  Jennie-R
  Belle of Titusville
  Small Hopes
  Judd No. 2
  Pride of the West
  Bob-tail
  Silver Link
  New Years Gift
  Banker’s Daughter
  Black Girl
  Jim Blaine
  Smooth Eph
  Bullion King
  Mt. Owens
  Good-enough
  Jackwhacker
  Moss Rose
  Cebolla Bella
  Cortez
  Bonanza
  Chance
  Hecla
  Irene
  Milwaukee
  Excelsior
  Cora
  Manitou
  Sheol
  Mammoth
  Undine
  Chimney
  Rescue
  Ladoga
  Buckeye
  Ella
  Stonewall
  Della S
  Topsey
  Detroit
  Pacific
  Terrible
  Skookum
  January
  Warrior
  Negola
  Brown Point


                         SOURCES OF INFORMATION

  _Crystal River Current_, 1886-1887.
  _Marble City Times_, 1893-1894.
  _Marble Booster_, 1911-1917.
  _Geological Survey Bulletin 884_ by J. W. Vanderwilt.
  _History of the State of Colorado_ by Frank Hall, The Blakely Printing
          Company, Chicago, Ill., Vol. IV.
  _A Statement to the Stockholders of the Colorado-Yule Marble Co._, by
          J. F. Manning. Data concerning dates of sales, buildings, etc.
  _History of Yule Marble Companies’ Properties at Marble_ by Edward C.
          Hanley, dated at Denver, Colo., Feb. 14, 1929.
  _Vermont Marble Co._, Proctor, Vt.


                             APPRECIATIONS

My special gratitude to the following persons who so graciously dug
through old papers, pictures, and memories to find special facts:

  Mr. and Mrs. Wm. G. McManus, Glenwood Springs, Colo.
  Mr. J. L. Dever, Glenwood Springs, Colo.
  Mr. and Mrs. John Reheuser, Denver, Colo.
  Mr. and Mrs. John T. Herman, Denver, Colo.
  Mr. Kenneth E. Herman, Denver, Colo.
  Mrs. V. F. Ratay, Denver, Colo.
  Mrs. Anna May Brooks, Littleton, Colo.
  Mr. Frank E. Kistler, Redstone, Colo.
  Mr. Colon L. Moore, Gunnison, Colo.
  Mr. John E. Davisson, Grand Junction, Colo.
  Mr. Dick CarScadden, Aspen, Colo.
  Christensen Bros., Aspen, Colo.
  Mr. Theodore (Sgt.) Jackson, Delta, Colo.
  Mr. and Mrs. Wade C. Loudermilk, Marble, Colo.
  Mr. Elmer Bair, Carbondale, Colo.
  Mrs. Maxine Fowler, Long Beach, Calif.
  Mrs. Lucille Jones, Sunnyside, Utah.
  Mrs. C. H. Patterson, Farmington, New Mex.
  Mr. C. Ambrose Williams, Phoenix, Ariz.
  Mr. John A. Williams, Phoenix, Ariz.
  Mr. Fred Raymond, Proctor, Vt.
  Mr. and Mrs. Olyn Parker, Denton, Tex.
  Mrs. Hazel McCully, Grand Junction, Colo.
  Vermont Marble Co., Proctor, Vt., graciously searched the files of the
          Colorado Yule Marble Co.—their Colorado branch—and sent much
          valuable data.




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]_Marble Booster_ newspaper, January 11, 1916.

[2]The above information was given me by Mrs. Ida Beltz of Glenwood
    Springs, Colo. who was a little McTavish girl living in Redstone at
    the time.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Crystal River Saga, by Theresa V. Hermon Francis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRYSTAL RIVER SAGA ***

***** This file should be named 57923-0.txt or 57923-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/9/2/57923/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

